1. Download the project's source code tree by executing

```bash
                 git clone git@github.com:mfragkoulis/PiCO_QL.git
```

2. Navigate to the downloaded directory; then 

```bash
                 cd PiCO_QL/src/Linux-kernel-mod/server/ 
```

where the PiCO QL LKM's source code is located.

3. As any kernel module, PiCO QL requires kernel headers. If not installed in your system, please type
```bash
                 sudo apt-get install linux-headers-`uname -r`
```

4. Only the first time PiCO QL is compiled (or after moving to another kernel version) type 

```bash
                 sudo make prep
```

to copy header file placeholders that PiCO QL requires in the central catalogue.

5. You can build the module by typing

```bash
                 sudo make
```

and clean compilation artifacts by typing

```bash
                 make clean
```

6. To load the module type

```bash
                 sudo insmod picoQL.ko
```

7. You can verify that the module is loaded by typing

```bash
                 grep 'picoQL' /proc/modules
```

8. Entering an SQL query is as easy as

```bash
                 echo "SELECT * FROM SQLITE_MASTER;" > /proc/picoQL
```

or you can try the [[Fast-track-installation-and-usage-instructions#wiki-Web_interface|Web interface]].

9. To retrieve the query's result set, type

```bash
                 cat /proc/picoQL
```

This query will return the virtual database schema.

10. It is possible to configure query output. Available options are:
* No metadata -'''default'''-, that is no column names, no result set rows and no execution time reported. In other words, uniform output as Unix commands. (''code'' '''100''')
* Metadata (''code'' '''111''')
* Result set as plain text output -'''default'''- (''code'' '''10''')
* Result set as HTML output (''code'' '''11''')

```bash
                 ./picoQL_config_ioctl code
```
First compile with:

```bash
                 gcc -g picoQL_config_ioctl.c -o picoQL_config_ioctl
```

11. To unload the module simply type

```bash
                 sudo rmmod picoQL
```

== Web interface ==
1. Having loaded the PiCO QL LKM, navigate to the client code as follows.

```bash
                 cd PiCO_QL/src/Linux-kernel-mod/client/ 
```

2. Compile the web interface by typing

```bash
                 make
```

and clean compilation artifacts by typing

```bash
                 make clean
```

3. Start the web interface by typing

```bash
                 ./picoQL-client
```

4. Open your favorite browser and go to

```markdown
                 http://localhost:8080
```

Once the web interface starts it configures the module to produce metadata and provide the result set as an HTML table. To facilitate querying, the query input page features the current virtual table schema.

